Add episode 40 (#344)
trinodb/trino.io: _episodes/40.md

---
layout: episode
title:  "40: Trino's cold as ice!"
date: 2022-09-07
tags: iceberg apache datalake table format sql schema evolution partition optimize
youtube_id: ""
wistia_id: ""
sections: 
   - title: "Concept of the week"
     desc: "Latest features in Apache Iceberg and the Iceberg connector"
     time: 0
   - title: "PR of the week"
     desc: ""
     time: 0
   - title: "Demo"
     desc: "Merge tables with Iceberg and reading the data in Trino"
     time: 0
   - title: "Question of the week"
     desc: ""
     time: 0
---

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="50%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/15/trino-iceberg.png"/><br/>
Looks like Commander Bun Bun is safe on this Iceberg<br/>
<a href="https://joshdata.me/iceberger.html">https://joshdata.me/iceberger.html</a>
</p>

## Guests
 * Ryan Blue, creator of Iceberg and CEO at 
 [Tabular](https://tabular.io) ([@rdblue](https://github.com/rdblue))
 * Sam Redai, Developer Advocate at [Tabular](https://tabular.io)
 ([@samuelredai](https://twitter.com/samuelredai))

## Releases 394 to 395

Official highlights from Martin Traverso:

[Trino 394]({{site.url}}/docs/current/release/release-394.html)

> * 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* JSON output format for EXPLAIN.
* Improved performance for LIKE expressions.
* `query` table function in BigQuery connector.
* INSERT support in BigQuery connector.
* TLS support in Pinot connector.
```

[Trino 395]({{site.url}}/docs/current/release/release-395.html)

* 

Additional highlights worth a mention according to Cole:

> * 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The improved performance of inserts on Delta Lake, Hive, and Iceberg is a huge one. We're not entirely sure how much it'll matter in production use cases, but some of the benchmarks suggested it could be massive - one test showed a 75% reduction in query duration.
* Dynamic function resolution in SPI is going to unlock some very neat possibilities down the line.
```

---
layout: episode
title:  "40: Trino's cold as ice!"
date: 2022-09-07
tags: iceberg apache datalake table format sql schema evolution partition optimize
youtube_id: ""
wistia_id: ""
sections: 
   - title: "Concept of the week"
     desc: "Latest features in Apache Iceberg and the Iceberg connector"
     time: 0
   - title: "PR of the week"

>      desc: ""

Reviewer 2: Add content

     time: 0
   - title: "Demo"
     desc: "Merge tables with Iceberg and reading the data in Trino"
     time: 0
   - title: "Question of the week"

>      desc: ""

Reviewer 2: add content

     time: 0
---

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="50%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/15/trino-iceberg.png"/><br/>
Looks like Commander Bun Bun is safe on this Iceberg<br/>
<a href="https://joshdata.me/iceberger.html">https://joshdata.me/iceberger.html</a>
</p>

> 

Reviewer 2: Should we have a hosts section going forward?

Author: I suppose it makes sense now that we switch out.

Author: done

> ## Guests

Reviewer 2: empty line after title

 * Ryan Blue, creator of Iceberg and CEO at 
 [Tabular](https://tabular.io) ([@rdblue](https://github.com/rdblue))
 * Sam Redai, Developer Advocate at [Tabular](https://tabular.io)
 ([@samuelredai](https://twitter.com/samuelredai))

## Releases 394 to 395

Official highlights from Martin Traverso:

[Trino 394]({{site.url}}/docs/current/release/release-394.html)

* JSON output format for EXPLAIN.
* Improved performance for LIKE expressions.
* `query` table function in BigQuery connector.
* INSERT support in BigQuery connector.
* TLS support in Pinot connector.

[Trino 395]({{site.url}}/docs/current/release/release-395.html)

> * 

Reviewer 2: tbd ... coming soon

Additional highlights worth a mention according to Cole:

> * The improved performance of inserts on Delta Lake, Hive, and Iceberg is a huge one. We're not entirely sure how much it'll matter in production use cases, but some of the benchmarks suggested it could be massive - one test showed a 75% reduction in query duration.

Reviewer 2: wrap

* Dynamic function resolution in SPI is going to unlock some very neat possibilities down the line. 

More detailed information is available in the release notes for
[Trino 394]({{site.url}}/docs/current/release/release-394.html),
and
[Trino 395]({{site.url}}/docs/current/release/release-395.html).

## Concept of the week: Latest features in Apache Iceberg and the Iceberg connector

> It has been over a year since we had Ryan on to discuss what Apache Iceberg is

Reviewer 2: on the Trino Community Broadcast as guest 

and link to these epsiodes

Author: they are linked below

and some detailed usage around the connector. Since then, the adoption of

> Iceberg in our community has skyrocketed as much better alternative to the Hive

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Iceberg in our community has skyrocketed. Iceberg is truly delivering as a much better alternative to the Hive
```

table format. As with anything in the Trino community, we follow the demand and
needs of the community. 

The initial phase of the Iceberg connector in Trino aimed to provide fast and 

> interoperable read support alongside other query engines like Apache Spark which

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
interoperable read support. A typical usage was Trino alongside other query engines like Apache Spark which
```

supported many of the data modification language (DML) SQL features on Iceberg.
One of the biggest requests we got as adoption increased was the ability to do
everything through just Trino. This episode dives into some of the latest
features that were missing from the early iterations of the Iceberg connector,
and what has changed in Iceberg as well!

### What is Apache Iceberg?

[Iceberg](https://iceberg.apache.org/) is a next-generation table format that 
defines a standard around the metadata used to map data to a SQL query engine. 
It addresses a lot of the maintainability and reliability issues many engineers
experienced with the way
[Hive modeled SQL tables]({% post_url 2020-10-20-intro-to-hive-connector %}) 
over big data files. 

One common confusion to point out is that table format is not equivalent to file
formats like ORC or Parquet. The table format is the layer that maintains 
metadata mapping these files to the concept of a table and other common database
abstractions.

> This episode will assume you have watched the first two episodes where we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This episode assumes you have some basic knowledge of Trino and Iceberg already. If you are new to Iceberg or need a refresher, we recommend the two older episodes about Iceberg and Trino basics.
```

Or something like that

covered a lot of the basics of Iceberg. If you are new to Iceberg or need a
refresher, we recommend you watch those episodes before diving into this one:

* [14: Iceberg: March of the Trinos]({{site.url}}/episodes/14.html)
* [15: Iceberg right ahead!]({{site.url}}/episodes/15.html)

> ### Why Iceberg?

Reviewer 2: I am stopping here for now .. will review more later

  timestamp '2021-04-01 19:59:59.999999' AT TIME ZONE 'America/Los_Angeles', 
  'es muy bueno', 
  ARRAY ['It is all normal'], 
  1
);

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging.logs;

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging."logs$snapshots";

/**
 * Rename column and drop column
 */

ALTER TABLE iceberg.logging.logs RENAME COLUMN severity TO priority;

SHOW CREATE TABLE iceberg.logging.logs;

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging.logs;

ALTER TABLE iceberg.logging.logs DROP COLUMN priority;

SHOW CREATE TABLE iceberg.logging.logs;

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging.logs;

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging."logs$snapshots";

/**
 * Travel back to previous snapshots
 */

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging.logs;

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging."logs$snapshots";

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging."logs@<insert-earlier-snapshot>";

CALL system.rollback_to_snapshot('logging', 'logs', <insert-earlier-snapshot>)

/**
 * Back to the future snapshot
 */

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging."logs$snapshots";

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging."logs@<insert-latest-snapshot>";

CALL system.rollback_to_snapshot('logging', 'logs', <insert-latest-snapshot>)

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging.logs;

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging."logs$partitions";
```

> ## Question of the week: 

Reviewer 2: Lets remove that .. there is enough material for multiple episodes already

## Events, news, and various links

> * [Raft Data Fabric](https://datafabric.goraft.tech/)

Reviewer 2: Remove

and add tabular

---
layout: episode
title:  "40: Trino's cold as ice!"
date: 2022-09-07
tags: iceberg apache datalake table format sql schema evolution partition optimize
youtube_id: ""
wistia_id: ""
sections: 
   - title: "Concept of the week"
     desc: "Latest features in Apache Iceberg and the Iceberg connector"
     time: 0
   - title: "PR of the week"
     desc: ""
     time: 0
   - title: "Demo"
     desc: "Merge tables with Iceberg and reading the data in Trino"
     time: 0
---

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="50%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/15/trino-iceberg.png"/><br/>
Looks like Commander Bun Bun is safe on this Iceberg<br/>
<a href="https://joshdata.me/iceberger.html">https://joshdata.me/iceberger.html</a>
</p>

## Hosts

 * Brian Olsen, Developer Advocate at [Starburst](https://starburst.io)
 ([@bitsondatadev](https://twitter.com/bitsondatadev))

>  * Cole Bowden, Release Manager at 

Reviewer 2: Use "Developer advocate" for both of you

>  [Starburst](https://starburst.io) ([@cole-m-bowden](https://www.linkedin.com/in/cole-m-bowden))

Author: the @ doesn't necessarily mean twitter handle though. @colebow do you have a twitter?

>  [Starburst](https://starburst.io) ([@cole-m-bowden](https://www.linkedin.com/in/cole-m-bowden))

Reviewer 2: @ pretty much indicated twitter imho .. anyway. You could just make his name the link .. or remove the @ symbol or even maybe use a linkedin icon

## Guests

 * Ryan Blue, creator of Iceberg and CEO at 
 [Tabular](https://tabular.io) ([@rdblue](https://github.com/rdblue))
 * Sam Redai, Developer Advocate at [Tabular](https://tabular.io)
 ([@samuelredai](https://twitter.com/samuelredai))

## Releases 394 to 395

Official highlights from Martin Traverso:

[Trino 394]({{site.url}}/docs/current/release/release-394.html)

* JSON output format for EXPLAIN.
* Improved performance for LIKE expressions.
* `query` table function in BigQuery connector.
* INSERT support in BigQuery connector.
* TLS support in Pinot connector.

[Trino 395]({{site.url}}/docs/current/release/release-395.html)

> * TBD/Coming Soon...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Faster `INSERT` queries.
* Better performance for large clusters.
* Improved memory efficiency for aggregations and fault tolerant execution.
* Faster aggregations over `DECIMAL` columns.
* Support for dynamic function resolution.
```

[a lot of new features open sourced](https://www.databricks.com/blog/2022/06/30/open-sourcing-all-of-delta-lake.html)
to catch up with a lot of Iceberg features. While this was a great advancement
for the Delta Lake community, there are still some missing capabilities that
Delta Lake and Hudi have as they remain Hive-like formats by designing the 
systems to remain backwards compatible actually reintroduces some limitations
that existed in Hive. 

On top of that, Iceberg has the most support for engines and puts a heavy 
emphasis on being a format that is interoperable across all of these query
engines. Much like using Trino, this improves the level of flexibility users
have to address a wider array of use cases that may involve querying over a data
warehouse like Snowflake and a data lake running with Iceberg. All of this is
made possibly by the [Iceberg specification](https://iceberg.apache.org/spec)
that all these query engines must follow in order to read from or write to
an Iceberg table.

Finally, a great video that dives into Iceberg is, 
"[Why you shouldn't care about Iceberg](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_GW3GYZK66U)."

### Catalogs

> Catalogs, in the context of Iceberg, is related to the central storage of the

Author: I meant "refers to"

metadata and providing the atomic compare-and-swap need to support 
[serializable isolation in Iceberg](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/reliability).

> The only existing catalog supported in Trino's Iceberg connector is the 

Author: I consider that another HMS but I can be specific.

auditing has to use the cherry-pick operation to publish. Eventually this will
become more streamlined with branching and tagging.

### Puffin file format

The [Puffin file format](https://iceberg.apache.org/puffin-spec) is an
alternative to [Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/) and 
[ORC](https://orc.apache.org/) that store information such as indexes and 
statistics about data managed in an Iceberg table that cannot be stored directly
within the Iceberg manifest. A Puffin file contains arbitrary pieces of 
information (here called “blobs”), along with metadata necessary to interpret 
them.

This format [was suggested](https://www.mail-archive.com/dev@iceberg.apache.org/msg03593.html)
by our own [Piotr Findeisen @findepi](https://github.com/findepi) and was
proposed to address a performance issue noted when using Trino on Iceberg. The
Puffin format will be a great extension for those using Iceberg tables.

### pyIceberg

Another exciting development is the 
[pyIceberg library](https://github.com/apache/iceberg/tree/master/python) that
enables users to read their data directly from Iceberg into pythonic data
structures.

> ### Trino connector updates

Author: > cut down to just talk about the features added in the Trino releases since the last TCB about Iceberg

That's what these are lol I didn't include any feature that existed when we did the last TCB episode in April 2021. Also these are all new since my last blog on Iceberg came out. So all of this we should touch on.

> not really relevant with what specific release

Fair enough. I'll keep the link to the PRs then and they can dig into it if they want.

> ### Trino connector updates

Author: I do want to keep the explanation for time travel though. That is a little confusing and it will be helpful to know what they can use in which version.

    ([PR](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/10810)) command removes all 
files from table’s data directory which are not linked from metadata files and 
that are older than the value of retention_threshold parameter.
* Iceberg v2 support ([PR1](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/11880), [PR2](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/12351), [PR3](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/12749), [PR4](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/11642), [PR5](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/9881), and many more...)

Almost every release, there is some sort of performance improvement around
many use cases involving [planning](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/13636),
[pushdown](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/13395), 
[avoiding excessive scanning](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/7367), and
much more.  A lot of the common use cases have been covered but please 
[open an issue](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/issues/new) if you experience
any slow or abnormal behavior in the Iceberg connector.

If you want all the latest features we described here and keep up with all these
performance improvements, it's important to keep up with the latest Trino 

> version. Of all the connectors, the connectors that support data lake, and

Reviewer 2: I would leave that out .. its only kind of true

object storage are the most common changes we're seeing.

## PR 13111: Scale table writers per task based on throughput

This [PR of the episode](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/13111) was 
contributed by Gaurav Sehgal ([@gaurav8297](https://github.com/gaurav8297)) to 

> enable Trino to automatically scale Iceberg writers. This PR aims to the number

Reviewer 2: really .. I dont think so .. this is for scaling any writers right?

Author: yup yup yup

 */

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging.logs FOR VERSION AS OF 2806470637437034115;

/**
 * Merge
 */
CREATE TABLE iceberg.logging.src (
   level varchar NOT NULL,
   message varchar NOT NULL,
   call_stack array(varchar)
)
WITH (
   format = 'ORC'
);

INSERT INTO iceberg.logging.src VALUES 
 (
   'ERROR',
   '3 message', 
   ARRAY ['Exception in thread "main" java.lang.NullPointerException']
 ), 
 (
   'WARN', 
   '4 message', 
   ARRAY ['blah blah blah']
 ), 
 (
   'WARN',
   '5 message', 
   ARRAY ['blah blah blah blah blah']
 );

MERGE INTO iceberg.logging.logs AS t
USING iceberg.logging.src AS s
ON s.message = t.message
WHEN MATCHED AND s.level = 'ERROR'
        THEN DELETE
WHEN MATCHED
    THEN UPDATE
        SET message = s.message || "-updated", 
            call_stack = s.call_stack || t.call_stack;

DROP TABLE iceberg.logging.logs;

DROP SCHEMA iceberg.logging;
```

## Events, news, and various links

* [Iceberg](https://iceberg.apache.org/)
* [Tabular](https://tabular.io)
* [Iceberg Community](https://iceberg.apache.org/community)
* [Iceberg Talks](https://iceberg.apache.org/talks)
* [Iceberg Blogs](https://iceberg.apache.org/blogs)

> Blogs

Reviewer 2: Blog posts

---
layout: episode
title: "40: Trino's cold as Iceberg!"
date: 2022-09-08
tags: iceberg apache datalake table format sql schema evolution partition optimize
youtube_id: "6NyfCV8Me0M"
wistia_id: "b9nlw7rjpr"

> sections: 

Reviewer 2: releases section is missing

Reviewer 2: maybe also needs separate one for Trino Summit announcement?

Reviewer 2: and an intro one??

Author: Not for the Intro, I assume if they want to see that they can just watch from the beginning. I forgot to announce the Trino Summit in the actual show though :(

>    - title: "Concept of the week"

Reviewer 2: Concept of the episode 

also maybe even better

Concept

or 

Topic

since there are so many

     desc: "What is Iceberg?"
     time: 687
   - title: "Concept of the week"
     desc: "Why Iceberg over other formats?"
     time: 1010
   - title: "Concept of the week"
     desc: "Metadata catalogs"
     time: 2140
   - title: "Concept of the week"
     desc: "Branching, tagging, and auditing, oh my!"
     time: 2634
   - title: "Concept of the week"
     desc: "The Puffin file format"
     time: 3053
   - title: "Concept of the week"
     desc: "Trino Iceberg connector updates"
     time: 3698

>    - title: "PR of the week"

Reviewer 2: of the episode

     desc: "PR 13111: Scale table writers per task based on throughput"
     time: 4297
   - title: "Demo"
     desc: "DML operations on Iceberg using Trino"
     time: 4531
---

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="50%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/15/trino-iceberg.png"/><br/>
Looks like Commander Bun Bun is safe on this Iceberg<br/>
<a href="https://joshdata.me/iceberger.html">https://joshdata.me/iceberger.html</a>
</p>

## Hosts

 * Brian Olsen, Developer Advocate at [Starburst](https://starburst.io)
 ([@bitsondatadev](https://twitter.com/bitsondatadev))
 * [Cole Bowden](https://www.linkedin.com/in/cole-m-bowden), Developer Advocate at 
 [Starburst](https://starburst.io)

## Guests

 * Ryan Blue, creator of Iceberg and CEO at 
 [Tabular](https://tabular.io) ([@rdblue](https://github.com/rdblue))
 * Sam Redai, Developer Advocate at [Tabular](https://tabular.io)
 ([@samuelredai](https://twitter.com/samuelredai))
 * [Tom Nats](https://www.linkedin.com/in/tomnats), Director of Customer Solutions at [Starburst](https://starburst.io)

## Register for Trino Summit 2022!

> Trino Summit 2022 is coming around the corner! The free event on November 10th 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Trino Summit 2022 is coming around the corner! The **free** event on November 10th 
```

Reviewer 2: or underscore.. whatever works for bolding

> Trino Summit 2022 is coming around the corner! The free event on November 10th 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trino Summit 2022 is coming around the corner! The free event is on November 10th 
```

> and will take place in-person at the Commonwealth Club in San Francisco, CA or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
will take place in-person at the Commonwealth Club in San Francisco, CA or
```

can also be attended remotely!  If you want to present, the 
[call for speakers](https://sessionize.com/trino-summit-2022/) is open until
September 15th. 

[You can register for the conference](https://www.starburst.io/info/trinosummit/)
at any time. We must limit in-person registrations to 250 
attendees, so register soon if you plan on attending in person!

## Releases 394 to 395

Official highlights from Martin Traverso:

[Trino 394]({{site.url}}/docs/current/release/release-394.html)

> * JSON output format for EXPLAIN.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* JSON output format for `EXPLAIN`.
```

> * Improved performance for LIKE expressions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Improved performance for `LIKE` expressions.
```

* `query` table function in BigQuery connector.

> * INSERT support in BigQuery connector.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `INSERT` support in BigQuery connector.
```

* TLS support in Pinot connector.

[Trino 395]({{site.url}}/docs/current/release/release-395.html)

> * Faster INSERT queries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Faster `INSERT` queries.
```

* Better performance for large clusters.
* Improved memory efficiency for aggregations and fault tolerant execution.

> * Faster aggregations over DECIMAL columns.

Reviewer 2: decimal

* Support for dynamic function resolution.

Additional highlights worth a mention according to Cole:

* The improved performance of inserts on Delta Lake, Hive, and Iceberg is a huge
one. We're not entirely sure how much it'll matter in production use cases, but
some of the benchmarks suggested it could be massive - one test showed a 75%
reduction in query duration.
* Dynamic function resolution in the SPI is going to unlock some very neat
possibilities down the line. 

More detailed information is available in the release notes for
[Trino 394]({{site.url}}/docs/current/release/release-394.html),
and
[Trino 395]({{site.url}}/docs/current/release/release-395.html).

## Concept of the week: Latest features in Apache Iceberg and the Iceberg connector

It has been over a year since we had Ryan on the Trino Community Broadcast as

> guest to discuss what Apache Iceberg is, and how it can be used in Trino. Since

Reviewer: ```suggestion
guest to discuss what Apache Iceberg is and how it can be used in Trino. Since
```
"how it can be used in Trino" isn't an independent clause, so no comma is necessary before the "and"

> then, the adoption of Iceberg in our community has skyrocketed. Iceberg is truly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then, the adoption of Iceberg in our community has skyrocketed. Iceberg is
```
adverbs like "truly" and "actually" don't add meaning and can often be cut out

the Iceberg connector and what has changed in Iceberg as well!

### What is Apache Iceberg?

[Iceberg](https://iceberg.apache.org/) is a next-generation table format that 
defines a standard around the metadata used to map data to a SQL query engine. 
It addresses a lot of the maintainability and reliability issues many engineers
experienced with the way
[Hive modeled SQL tables]({% post_url 2020-10-20-intro-to-hive-connector %}) 
over big data files. 

One common confusion to point out is that table format is not equivalent to file
formats like ORC or Parquet. The table format is the layer that maintains 
metadata mapping these files to the concept of a table and other common database
abstractions.

This episode assumes you have some basic knowledge of Trino and Iceberg already. If
you are new to Iceberg or need a refresher, we recommend the two older episodes
about Iceberg and Trino basics:

* [14: Iceberg: March of the Trinos]({{site.url}}/episodes/14.html)
* [15: Iceberg right ahead!]({{site.url}}/episodes/15.html)

### Why Iceberg over other formats?

There has been some great advancements to big data technologies that brought

> back some SQL and data warehouse capabilities. However, Hive and Hive-like table

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
back SQL and data warehouse capabilities. However, Hive and Hive-like table
```

formats are still missing some capabilities due to limitations that Hive tables
have, such as dropping and reintroducing stale data unintentionally. On top of

> that, Hive tables require a lot of knowledge of Hive internals. More recent

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that, Hive tables require a lot of knowledge of Hive internals. Some recent
```

Reviewer 2: Somehow we need to add that Iceberg does not fall into that category .. maybe to start the next paragraph?

formats aim to remain backwards compatible with Hive, but inadvertently
reintroduce these limitations.

On top of that, Iceberg has the most support for query engines and puts a heavy 
emphasis on being a format that is interoperable. This improves the level of
flexibility users have to address a wider array of use cases that may involve
querying over a system like Snowflake or a data lakehouse running with
Iceberg. All of this is made possible by the
[Iceberg specification](https://iceberg.apache.org/spec) that all these query
engines must follow.

Finally, a great video presented by Ryan Blue that dives into Iceberg is, 
"[Why you shouldn't care about Iceberg](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_GW3GYZK66U)."

### Metadata catalogs

Catalogs, in the context of Iceberg, refer to the central storage of metadata.
Catalogs are also used to provide the atomic compare-and-swap needed to support 
[serializable isolation in Iceberg](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/reliability).
We'll refer to them as metadata catalogs to avoid confusion with Trino 
[catalogs](https://trino.io/docs/current/sql/show-catalogs.html).

> The two existing catalogs supported in Trino's Iceberg connector is the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The two existing catalogs supported in Trino's Iceberg connector are the 
```

[Hive Metastore Service]({{site.url}}/docs/current/connector/iceberg.html#hive-metastore-catalog)
and the AWS metastore counterpart of the Hive Metastore, Glue. While this 

> provides a nice migration from the Hive model, many are looking to replace these

Reviewer 2: Do we want to mention that the HMS is barely used in Iceberg since most metadata is in the filesystem / tablformat itself?

Reviewer 2: And hence the catalog can be much simpler than HMS

Reviewer 2: @bitsondatadev ?

Author: Ah, I meant to come back to this one...I can make that mention yes.

* [Trino PR 13294: Add Iceberg RESTSessionCatalog Implementation](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/13294)

### Branching, tagging, and auditing, oh my!

Another feature set that is coming in Iceberg is the ability to use 
[refs to alias your snapshots](https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/5364).
This would enable branching and tagging behavior similar to git and treating
the snapshot as a commit. This is yet another way that simplifies moving between
known states of the data in Iceberg.

On a related note, branching and tagging will eventually be used in the 
[audit integration in Iceberg](https://tabular.io/blog/integrated-audits).
Auditing allows you to push a soft commit by making a snapshot available, but 
it is not initially published to the primary table. This is achieved using Spark
and setting the `spark.wap.id` configuration property. This enables interesting
patterns like 
[Write-Audit-Publish (WAP) pattern](https://www.dremio.com/subsurface/write-audit-publish-pattern-via-apache-iceberg/),
where you first write the data, audit it using a data quality tool like Great 

> Expectations, and lastly publish the data to be visible from the main table. 

Reviewer 2: Link to GE website?

Currently, auditing has to use the cherry-pick operation to publish. This 
becomes more streamlined with branching and tagging.

### The Puffin file format

The [Puffin file format](https://iceberg.apache.org/puffin-spec) is an
alternative to [Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/) and 
[ORC](https://orc.apache.org/). This format stores information such as indexes 
and statistics about data managed in an Iceberg table that cannot be stored 
directly within the Iceberg manifest. A Puffin file contains arbitrary pieces of 
information called “blobs”, along with metadata necessary to interpret them.

This format [was proposed](https://www.mail-archive.com/dev@iceberg.apache.org/msg03593.html)
by long-time Trino maintainer, [Piotr Findeisen @findepi](https://github.com/findepi),
to address a performance issue noted when using Trino on Iceberg. The Puffin
format is a great extension for those using Iceberg tables, as it enables better
query plans in Trino at the file level.

### pyIceberg

The [pyIceberg library](https://github.com/apache/iceberg/tree/master/python) 
is an exciting development that enables users to read their data directly from

> Iceberg into native python data structures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Iceberg into native Python data structures.
```

Reviewer 2: In their own Python code easily?? or so ..

SET
  call_stack = call_stack || 'WHALE HELLO THERE!'
WHERE
  lower(level) = 'warn';

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging.logs;

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging."logs$snapshots";

/**
 * Read data from an old snapshot (Time travel)
 *
 * Old way: SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging."logs@2806470637437034115";
 */

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging.logs FOR VERSION AS OF 2806470637437034115;

/**
 * Merge
 */
CREATE TABLE iceberg.logging.src (
   level varchar NOT NULL,
   message varchar NOT NULL,
   call_stack array(varchar)
)
WITH (
   format = 'ORC'
);

INSERT INTO iceberg.logging.src VALUES 
 (
   'ERROR',
   '3 message', 
   ARRAY ['This one will not show up because it is an ERROR']
 ), 
 (
   'WARN', 
   '4 message', 
   ARRAY ['This should show up']
 ), 
 (
   'WARN',
   '5 message', 
   ARRAY ['This should show up as well']
 );

MERGE INTO iceberg.logging.logs AS t
USING iceberg.logging.src AS s
ON s.message = t.message
WHEN MATCHED AND s.level = 'ERROR'
        THEN DELETE
WHEN MATCHED
    THEN UPDATE
        SET message = s.message || '-updated', 
            call_stack = s.call_stack || t.call_stack;

DROP TABLE iceberg.logging.logs;

DROP SCHEMA iceberg.logging;
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Some sort of conclusion sentence is missing

keep up with the latest Trino version.

## PR 13111: Scale table writers per task based on throughput

This [PR of the episode](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/13111) was 
contributed by Gaurav Sehgal ([@gaurav8297](https://github.com/gaurav8297)) to 
enable Trino to automatically scale writers. This PR aims to the number of task
writers per worker.

You can enable this feature by setting `scale_task_writers` true in your
configuration. Its initial test results are showing a sixfold speed increase.

Thank you so much to Gaurav and all the reviewers that got this PR through!

## Demo: DML operations on Iceberg using Trino

For this demo of the episode, we use the same schema as the demo we ran in
[episode 15]({{site.url}}/episodes/15.html), and revise the syntax to
include new features.

Let's start up a local Trino coordinator and Hive metastore. Clone the 
repository and navigate to the `iceberg/trino-iceberg-minio` directory. Then
start up the containers using Docker Compose.

```
git clone git@github.com:bitsondatadev/trino-getting-started.git
cd iceberg/trino-iceberg-minio
docker-compose up -d
```

Now open up your favorite Trino client and connect it to 

> `jdbc:trino://localhost:8080` to run the following commands:

Reviewer 2: We should change this to just localhost:8080 or explain that this URL is the JDBC URL only. Or both. And for example CLI usage is different.

Author: we can keep it simple and just remove jdbc

SET
  call_stack = call_stack || 'WHALE HELLO THERE!'
WHERE
  lower(level) = 'warn';

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging.logs;

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging."logs$snapshots";

/**
 * Read data from an old snapshot (Time travel)
 *
 * Old way: SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging."logs@2806470637437034115";
 */

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging.logs FOR VERSION AS OF 2806470637437034115;

/**
 * Merge
 */
CREATE TABLE iceberg.logging.src (
   level varchar NOT NULL,
   message varchar NOT NULL,
   call_stack array(varchar)
)
WITH (
   format = 'ORC'
);

INSERT INTO iceberg.logging.src VALUES 
 (
   'ERROR',
   '3 message', 
   ARRAY ['This one will not show up because it is an ERROR']
 ), 
 (
   'WARN', 
   '4 message', 
   ARRAY ['This should show up']
 ), 
 (
   'WARN',
   '5 message', 
   ARRAY ['This should show up as well']
 );

MERGE INTO iceberg.logging.logs AS t
USING iceberg.logging.src AS s
ON s.message = t.message
WHEN MATCHED AND s.level = 'ERROR'
        THEN DELETE
WHEN MATCHED
    THEN UPDATE
        SET message = s.message || '-updated', 
            call_stack = s.call_stack || t.call_stack;

DROP TABLE iceberg.logging.logs;

DROP SCHEMA iceberg.logging;
```

> This is just the tip of the iceberg of just how powerful `MERGE` and the other

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is just the tip of the iceberg that shows the powerful `MERGE` statement and the other
```

WHERE
  lower(level) = 'warn';

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging.logs;

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging."logs$snapshots";

/**
 * Read data from an old snapshot (Time travel)
 *
 * Old way: SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging."logs@2806470637437034115";
 */

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging.logs FOR VERSION AS OF 2806470637437034115;

/**
 * Merge
 */
CREATE TABLE iceberg.logging.src (
   level varchar NOT NULL,
   message varchar NOT NULL,
   call_stack array(varchar)
)
WITH (
   format = 'ORC'
);

INSERT INTO iceberg.logging.src VALUES 
 (
   'ERROR',
   '3 message', 
   ARRAY ['This one will not show up because it is an ERROR']
 ), 
 (
   'WARN', 
   '4 message', 
   ARRAY ['This should show up']
 ), 
 (
   'WARN',
   '5 message', 
   ARRAY ['This should show up as well']
 );

MERGE INTO iceberg.logging.logs AS t
USING iceberg.logging.src AS s
ON s.message = t.message
WHEN MATCHED AND s.level = 'ERROR'
        THEN DELETE
WHEN MATCHED
    THEN UPDATE
        SET message = s.message || '-updated', 
            call_stack = s.call_stack || t.call_stack;

DROP TABLE iceberg.logging.logs;

DROP SCHEMA iceberg.logging;
```

This is just the tip of the iceberg that shows the powerful `MERGE` and 

> statement the other features we have added to Iceberg!

Reviewer 2: Sentence is still busted

```
This is just the tip of the iceberg that shows the powerful `MERGE` statement
and other features we have added to Iceberg
```

---
layout: episode
title: "40: Trino's cold as Iceberg!"
date: 2022-09-08
tags: iceberg apache datalake table format sql schema evolution partition optimize
youtube_id: "6NyfCV8Me0M"
wistia_id: "b9nlw7rjpr"
sections: 
   - title: "Concept of the week"
     desc: "What is Iceberg?"
     time: 687
   - title: "Concept of the week"
     desc: "Why Iceberg over other formats?"
     time: 1010
   - title: "Concept of the week"
     desc: "Metadata catalogs"
     time: 2140
   - title: "Concept of the week"
     desc: "Branching, tagging, and auditing, oh my!"
     time: 2634
   - title: "Concept of the week"

>      desc: "The Puffin format"

Reviewer 2: Maybe.. the Puffin file format ?

     time: 3053
   - title: "Concept of the week"
     desc: "Trino Iceberg connector updates"
     time: 3698
   - title: "PR of the week"
     desc: "PR 13111: Scale table writers per task based on throughput"
     time: 4297
   - title: "Demo"
     desc: "DML operations on Iceberg using Trino"
     time: 4531
---

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="50%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/15/trino-iceberg.png"/><br/>
Looks like Commander Bun Bun is safe on this Iceberg<br/>
<a href="https://joshdata.me/iceberger.html">https://joshdata.me/iceberger.html</a>
</p>

## Hosts

 * Brian Olsen, Developer Advocate at [Starburst](https://starburst.io)
 ([@bitsondatadev](https://twitter.com/bitsondatadev))
 * Cole Bowden, Developer Advocate at 
 [Starburst](https://starburst.io) ([@cole-m-bowden](https://www.linkedin.com/in/cole-m-bowden))

## Guests

 * Ryan Blue, creator of Iceberg and CEO at 
 [Tabular](https://tabular.io) ([@rdblue](https://github.com/rdblue))
 * Sam Redai, Developer Advocate at [Tabular](https://tabular.io)
 ([@samuelredai](https://twitter.com/samuelredai))
 * Tom Nats, Director of Customer Solutions at [Starburst](https://starburst.io)

>  ([@tomnats](https://www.linkedin.com/in/tomnats))

Reviewer 2: Same as for cole

## Register for Trino Summit 2022!

> Trino Summit 2022 is coming around the corner! This will be a hybrid event on 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Trino Summit 2022 is coming around the corner! The free event on
```

* INSERT support in BigQuery connector.
* TLS support in Pinot connector.

[Trino 395]({{site.url}}/docs/current/release/release-395.html)

* Faster INSERT queries.
* Better performance for large clusters.
* Improved memory efficiency for aggregations and fault tolerant execution.
* Faster aggregations over DECIMAL columns.
* Support for dynamic function resolution.

Additional highlights worth a mention according to Cole:

* The improved performance of inserts on Delta Lake, Hive, and Iceberg is a huge
one. We're not entirely sure how much it'll matter in production use cases, but
some of the benchmarks suggested it could be massive - one test showed a 75%
reduction in query duration.
* Dynamic function resolution in SPI is going to unlock some very neat
possibilities down the line. 

More detailed information is available in the release notes for
[Trino 394]({{site.url}}/docs/current/release/release-394.html),
and
[Trino 395]({{site.url}}/docs/current/release/release-395.html).

## Concept of the week: Latest features in Apache Iceberg and the Iceberg connector

It has been over a year since we had Ryan on the Trino Community Broadcast as

> guest to discuss what Apache Iceberg is and some detailed usage around the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
guest to discuss what Apache Iceberg is and how it can be used in Trino.
```

connector. Since then, the adoption of Iceberg in our community has skyrocketed.
Iceberg is truly delivering as much better alternative to the Hive table format. 

> As with anything in the Trino community, we follow the demand and

Reviewer 2: Drop this sentence .. its just filler

needs of the community. 

The initial phase of the Iceberg connector in Trino aimed to provide fast and 
interoperable read support. A typical usage was Trino alongside other query 
engines like Apache Spark which supported many of the data modification language
(DML) SQL features on Iceberg. One of the biggest requests we got as adoption

> increased was the ability to do everything through just Trino. This episode

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
increased was the ability to do everything through Trino. This episode
```

dives into some of the latest features that were missing from the early
iterations of the Iceberg connector, and what has changed in Iceberg as well!

### What is Apache Iceberg?

[Iceberg](https://iceberg.apache.org/) is a next-generation table format that 
defines a standard around the metadata used to map data to a SQL query engine. 
It addresses a lot of the maintainability and reliability issues many engineers
experienced with the way
[Hive modeled SQL tables]({% post_url 2020-10-20-intro-to-hive-connector %}) 
over big data files. 

One common confusion to point out is that table format is not equivalent to file
formats like ORC or Parquet. The table format is the layer that maintains 
metadata mapping these files to the concept of a table and other common database
abstractions.

This episode assumes you hsome basic knowledge of Trino and Iceberg already. If
you are new to Iceberg or need a refresher, we recommend the two older episodes
about Iceberg and Trino basics:

* [14: Iceberg: March of the Trinos]({{site.url}}/episodes/14.html)
* [15: Iceberg right ahead!]({{site.url}}/episodes/15.html)

### Why Iceberg over other formats?

> Iceberg is one of three of the recent table formats. There is also

Reviewer 2: We did not talk about Delta Lake and Hudi in the call .. lets remove it all here as well

[Delta Lake](https://delta.io) and [Apache Hudi](https://hudi.apache.org), which
Trino also supports. DeltaLake recently had 
[a lot of new features open sourced](https://www.databricks.com/blog/2022/06/30/open-sourcing-all-of-delta-lake.html)
to catch up with Iceberg. While this was a great advancement for the Delta Lake
community, there are still some missing capabilities that Delta Lake and Hudi 
have as they remain Hive-like formats by designing the systems to remain 
backwards compatible actually reintroduces some limitations that existed in
Hive. 

> On top of that, Iceberg has the most support for query engines and puts a heavy 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Iceberg has the most support for query engines and puts a heavy 
```

still weird ... and probably should change if we drop Delta Lake and Hudi mentions

emphasis on being a format that is interoperable. This improves the level of
flexibility users have to address a wider array of use cases that may involve

> querying over a data warehouse like Snowflake or a data lake running with

Reviewer 2: Somehow my old review comment is lost .. 

over a system like Snowflake 

cant say data warehouse for it .. 

and use lakehouse for Iceberg

Iceberg. All of this is made possibly by the
[Iceberg specification](https://iceberg.apache.org/spec) that all these query
engines must follow.

Finally, a great video presented by Ryan Blue that dives into Iceberg is, 
"[Why you shouldn't care about Iceberg](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_GW3GYZK66U)."

> ### Metadata Catalogs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Metadata catalogs
```

> Catalogs, in the context of Iceberg, refers to the central storage of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Catalogs, in the context of Iceberg, refers to the central storage of
```

> metadata and providing the atomic compare-and-swap need to support 

Reviewer 2: Start a new sentence after metadata and reword .. I am not sure what you are trying to say

[serializable isolation in Iceberg](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/reliability).
We'll refer to them as metadata catalogs to avoid confusion with Trino 
[catalogs](https://trino.io/docs/current/sql/show-catalogs.html).

> The two existing catalog supported in Trino's Iceberg connector is the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The two existing catalogs supported in Trino's Iceberg connector are the 
```

[Hive Metastore Service]({{site.url}}/docs/current/connector/iceberg.html#hive-metastore-catalog)
and the AWS metastore counterpart of the Hive Metastore, Glue. While this 
provides a nice migration from the Hive model, many are looking to replace these
rather cumbersome catalogs with something that's lightweight. Two popular 
catalogs outside of these are the 
[JDBC catalog](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/jdbc)
and the 
[REST catalog](https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/4348).

> There are two PRs in progress to add these metadata catalogs to Trino:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two PRs in progress to support these metadata catalogs to Trino:
```

* [Trino PR 11772: Support JDBC catalog in Iceberg connector](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/11772)
* [Trino PR 13294: Add Iceberg RESTSessionCatalog Implementation](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/13294)

### Branching, tagging, and auditing, oh my!

Another set of features that is coming in Iceberg is the ability to use 
[refs to alias your snapshots](https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/5364).
This would enable branching and tagging behavior similar to git and treating
the snapshot as a commit. This is yet another way that will simplify moving
between known states of the data in Iceberg.

On a related note, branching and tagging will eventually be used in the 
[audit integration in Iceberg](https://tabular.io/blog/integrated-audits).
Auditing allows you to push a soft commit by making a snapshot available, but 
is not initially published to the primary table. This is achieved using Spark
and setting the `spark.wap.id`. This enables interesting patterns like 

> [Write-Audit-Publish (WAP) pattern](https://www.dremio.com/subsurface/write-audit-publish-pattern-via-apache-iceberg/),

Reviewer 2: I remember writing a WAP frontend for a website ages ago .. hahah https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wireless_Application_Protocol

> [Write-Audit-Publish (WAP) pattern](https://www.dremio.com/subsurface/write-audit-publish-pattern-via-apache-iceberg/),

Author: You don't want to know what it means  in the song! 🤣

where you first write the data, audit it using a data quality tool like Great 
Expectations, and lastly publish the data to be visible from the main table. 
Currently, auditing has to use the cherry-pick operation to publish. Eventually
this will become more streamlined with branching and tagging.

### Puffin file format

The [Puffin file format](https://iceberg.apache.org/puffin-spec) is an
alternative to [Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/) and 
[ORC](https://orc.apache.org/). This format stores information such as indexes 
and statistics about data managed in an Iceberg table that cannot be stored 
directly within the Iceberg manifest. A Puffin file contains arbitrary pieces of 

> information called “blobs”, along with metadata necessary to interpret them.

Reviewer 2: berg  . just means mountain in german .. fyi

This format [was proposed](https://www.mail-archive.com/dev@iceberg.apache.org/msg03593.html)
by long-time Trino maintainer, [Piotr Findeisen @findepi](https://github.com/findepi),
to address a performance issue noted when using Trino on Iceberg. The Puffin

> format will be a great extension for those using Iceberg tables as it will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
format will be a great extension for those using Iceberg tables, as it will
```

enable better query plans in Trino at the file level.

### pyIceberg

> Another exciting development is the 

Reviewer 2: The pyIceberg library is an exciting development that..

[pyIceberg library](https://github.com/apache/iceberg/tree/master/python) that

> enables users to read their data directly from Iceberg into native python data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
enables users to read their data directly from Iceberg into native Python data
```

structures.

> ### Trino Iceberg connector updates

Reviewer 2: Since you used this in the broadcast lets leave .. but going forward this level of detail (PRs) is overkill imho

Author: I think pointing to PRs does two things. 1) it helps the nerds who want to dig in and understand how some function works at the code level 2) it makes it easy for us to go back and find this for end of year blogs and such.

Reviewer 2: hm.. i am skeptical..

([PR](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/10497)) which is the equivalent to
the Spark SQL 
[rewrite_data_files](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/spark-procedures/#rewrite_data_files).
    * [`expire_snapshots`]({{site.url}}/docs/current/connector/iceberg.html#expire-snapshots)
([PR](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/10810)) and uses the equivalent name
in Spark.
    * [`remove_orphan_files`]({{site.url}}/docs/current/connector/iceberg.html#remove-orphan-files)
([PR](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/10810)) and uses the equivalent name
in Spark.
* Iceberg v2 support ([PR1](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/11880), [PR2](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/12351), [PR3](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/12749), [PR4](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/11642), [PR5](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/9881), and many more...)

Almost every release, there is some sort of performance improvement around
many use cases involving [planning](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/13636),
[pushdown](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/13395), 
[avoiding excessive scanning](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/7367), and

> much more.  A lot of the common use cases have been covered but please 

Reviewer 2: Very long and winded ..

Maybe just

If you experience an issue, open an issue

Or we can even leave it out..

[open an issue](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/issues/new) if you experience
any slow or abnormal behavior in the Iceberg connector.

If you want all the latest features we described here and keep up with all these

> performance improvements, it's important to keep up with the latest Trino 

Reviewer 2: reword .. "keep up" used twice in same sentence

version.

## PR 13111: Scale table writers per task based on throughput

This [PR of the episode](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/13111) was 
contributed by Gaurav Sehgal ([@gaurav8297](https://github.com/gaurav8297)) to 
enable Trino to automatically scale writers. This PR aims to the number of task
writers per worker.

You can enable this feature by setting `scale_task_writers` true in your

> configuration. It has some initial results are showing a six fold speed 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configuration. Its initial test results are showing a sixfold speed 
```

increase.

> Thank you so much to Gaurav, and all the reviewers that got this PR through!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thank you so much to Gaurav and all the reviewers that got this PR through!
```

## Demo: DML operations on Iceberg using Trino

> For this demo of the episode, we will use the same schema as the demo we ran in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this demo of the episode, we use the same schema as the demo we ran in
```

> [episode 15]({{site.url}}/episodes/15.html), but we will revise the syntax to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[episode 15]({{site.url}}/episodes/15.html), and revise the syntax to
```

include new features.

> Let's start up a local Trino coordinator and Hive metastore. Clone this 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's start up a local Trino coordinator and Hive metastore. Clone the 
```

repository and navigate to the `iceberg/trino-iceberg-minio` directory. Then
start up the containers using Docker Compose.

```
git clone git@github.com:bitsondatadev/trino-getting-started.git

> 

Reviewer 2: drop the empty lines
